## Fundamentals of Tokenization in NLP

Let's understand what a "token" is. A token can be anything. It has a definition that varies from model to model. Let's say every alphabet is a token.

A - Token
B - Token
C - Token
D - Token
E - Token

Computers are good at math. They don't understand "ABCs"; they are more comfortable with numbers. So internally, what happens is we assign numbers to these tokens. For example:

A - 1
B - 2
C - 3
D - 4
E - 5

So, this is my version of tokens. If we have to type "BDE", we can basically represent it as "245". So that means, in the world of tokenization, what happens is: if you give me the token "123" and pass it to a transformer (like GPT), it can predict the next token to be 4.

Now, when you take "123" along with the output from the previous run, which is "1234", and pass it again to the transformer, it can predict that the most probable next token is 5.

So, tokens are basically what your input is mapped into—numbers. The "characters" that humans use are mapped to some numbers, and these are known as "tokens".

This was just a simple version. In reality, this is not exactly how tokenization works. Tokens differ from model to model.

**Tokenization** — Converting user input into a set of numbers understandable by an LLM is known as tokenization.

When you type something to an LLM—for example, "Hey There!"—the text "Hey There!" does not go directly to the LLM. It is first converted into numbers through tokenization. These tokens are then sent to the LLM. The LLM predicts the next token. This process is repeated, and when finished, the output is detokenized into human-readable language (like English). This is how we get the output we see.
